---
layout: post
title: "KeyRemap4MacBook fixes the broken 'Dvorak - Qwerty ⌘' layout"
date: 2012-09-22 08:00
comments: true
categories: [Dvorak]
---
I switched to the "Dvorak keyboard layout":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dvorak_Simplified_Keyboard over Christmas break in 2001, figuring that if I were to spend the next 80 years typing, a couple weeks re-learning to touch type would be worth it.

And it has been. My hands just never get tired of typing, which is good because I spend all day at it. There are only two problems with being in the minority on this:

# Shortcut keys are less convenient to use. Cut, copy, and paste are X, C, and V for a reason. You can get used to the new positions, but they never quite feel as handy.
# Sharing or borrowing other computers becomes more difficult.

<!--more-->

The first problem I solved early on by using a keyboard layout that is Dvorak except when you're holding down the command key. On a Mac, this is the "Dvorak - Qwerty ⌘" input source.

Since I learned touch-typing on Qwerty, I can switch between the layouts in my head with some effort or just look at the keys as I type, so the second problem isn't a very big one for infrequent and short-term Qwerty use. For the computer I shared with my wife for three or four years, we got used to switching input modes from the menubar or by shortcut key.

This year, I almost quit Dvorak when I discovered "Apple's Dvorak - Qwerty ⌘ layout is broken":https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/keyremap4macbook/QNZ3LGsKNFE/Yg-jlbAoL-QJ and there's "no way to get to some shortcut keys":https://github.com/textmate/textmate/issues/241. That was a minor frustration compared to how it made "pair programming more complicated":/blog/2012/09/22/pair-programming-when-you-type-on-different-keyboard-layouts/.

"KeyRemap4MacBook":http://pqrs.org/macosx/keyremap4macbook/ solved these problems. I've dropped Dvorak-Qwerty ⌘ and now just use the Dvorak input source with KeyRemap4MacBook converting my ⌘ keypresses.  ⌘ + and - makes my text bigger and smaller and I can @<Ctrl-W>@ in vim again--two glitches peculiar to Dvorak - Qwerty ⌘.

My "private.xml file":https://gist.github.com/3494247, which is how you make custom mappings in KeyRemap4Macbook, contains the mapping, along with some device_only and device_not filters that limit it to a certain set of keyboards at work, where our multitude of bluetooth devices are named after well-known Rubyists.
